---
title: "Music Lables"
author: ["Philipp Neumann"]
date: 2025-02-18T12:08:00+01:00
lastmod: 2025-03-24T11:25:00+01:00
tags: ["music"]
draft: false
---

## Overview {#overview}

This note contains a list of [Music]({{< relref "20250212204809-music.md" >}}) Lables to keep an eye on.


## Content {#content}

-   [Ostgut Ton](https://www.ostgut.berlin/de/label/)
    -   [Wikipedia Article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ostgut_Ton)

> Ostgut Ton (also known as Ostgut Tonträger) was a German record label owned by the club Berghain in Berlin. Resident Advisor described it "a dominant force in dance music, beloved for its mix series and dozens of EPs, albums and compilations."
>
> The label's first releases were by Berghain/Panorama Bar residents such as André Galluzzi, Cassy, and Ben Klock.
>
> Amongst the producers that have released for the label are André Galluzzi, Ben Klock, Cassy, Edit-Select, Len Faki, Luke Slater, Marcel Dettmann, Marcel Fengler, Murat Tepeli, My My, Nick Höppner, Paul Brtschitsch, Prosumer, Samuli Kemppi, Shed, Tama Sumo, Tobias Freund, Tim Paris, and Vatican Shadow.
>
> Ostgut Ton closed in December 2021.

-   [Raster](https://raster-media.net/about-raster)
    -   Website Text

> Since its founding in 1996, raster has established itself as an international artistic
> platform and a label for experimental electronic music which would not be
> imaginable without the diverse engagement of its associated artists. It was
> founded with the aim of releasing groundbreaking electronic music and wants to
> create and maintain spaces for future-oriented experiments. Serial concepts are
> being pursued, and audiovisual forms of presentation of electronic music were
> the focus already at an early stage.
>
> In addition to music which has influenced subsequent generations through
> production techniques, raster also published books (awarded), data carriers
> (awarded) and graphics, among others. Another aspect includes activities such
> as installation works, often realized in collaboration with well-known institutions
> such as ZKM / Karlsruhe, TodaysArt / The Hague, Lenbachhaus / Munich,
> Ruhrtriennale / Bochum and the Museum of Contemporary Art / Toronto.
>
> Since 2005, raster has also been hosting a well-known, non-commercial music
> festival. Originally initiated as a private party, the "Electric Campfire" was an
> annual guest of the German Academy Villa Massimo in Rome between 2007
> and 2017. Since 2018, the festival has been taking place at different locations
> every year. Its aim is to bring artists and community into real exchange.


## Footer {#footer}


### Links {#links}
