---
title: "Bits and Bytes and the Binary System"
author: ["Philipp Neumann"]
date: 2025-03-07T07:57:00+01:00
lastmod: 2025-03-10T21:35:00+01:00
tags: ["programming", "computer"]
draft: false
---

## Overview {#overview}

Bits are the most basic unit of information in computing. Bit is short
for **binary digit**. They represents a logical state, which is one of two
possible values. It is either `1` or `0`, but can also be represented as
`true` or `false`, `yes` or `no`, `on` or `off`.

A **Byte** is meassuring size of [Bits]({{< relref "20250307075751-bits.md" >}}). Most of the time one byte
represents 8 [Bits]({{< relref "20250307075751-bits.md" >}}).


## Content {#content}


### Data Type Sizes {#data-type-sizes}

In computing and programming, specific data types have a fixed size,
representing the memory they occupy in the computer. To write
efficient software, you should choose the right data type to avoid
unnecessary memory usage.

For example:
If you need a variable for the age of a person, you just need a `8
bit` data type. Because:

\\(2^8=256\\)

which is sufficient.

You also have to take into account that if you need a negative number
 to be represented, you need to use a `signed` data type, which cuts the
 available range in half. Instead of representing values from 0 to
 255, a signed 8-bit integer can store values from -128 to 127.


### How to represent a (positiv) integer number in binary {#how-to-represent-a--positiv--integer-number-in-binary}

Imagine you want to represent the number `123` as a byte, meaning as
8 Bits. To do this, you can create a table with 8 columns, one for
each bit, along with his corresponding exponent. Below each column,
write the value of the bit's exponent.
Then starting from left to right, check whether the exponent value fits into
the number you want to represent.

-   If it does not, the bit value is `0`
-   If it fits, set the bit to `1` and subtract the exponent value from
    the remaining number
-   Repeat this process for the next exponent, always checking whether
    it fits into the current remainder

Here's how the number `123` is represented in binary:

| Exponents      | 2^7 | 2^6 | 2^5       | 2^4      | 2^3      | 2^2    | 2^1 | 2^0   |
|----------------|-----|-----|-----------|----------|----------|--------|-----|-------|
| Exponent Value | 128 | 64  | 32        | 16       | 8        | 4      | 2   | 1     |
| Bit            | 0   | 1   | 1         | 1        | 1        | 0      | 1   | 1     |
| Calculation    | 123 | 123 | 123-64=59 | 59-32=27 | 27-16=11 | 11-8=3 | 3   | 3-2=1 |


### How to represent a signed integer dtype in binary {#how-to-represent-a-signed-integer-dtype-in-binary}

If you want to represent a **signed** dtype the leftmost bit, which is the
**Most Significant Bit** (short: MSB), is reserved
for the sign

-   0 -&gt; positiv number
-   1 -&gt; negativ number

Since the first bit is reserved for representing the sign, you lose a
whole bit for number representation. This meands that signed data
types have a smaller numerical range compared to unsigned data types.

If you want to represent a negative number, it is common that the
**twos complement** is used. For this, the number is represented as
described for unsigned numbers. But after this every bit is negated (1
to 0 and 0 to 1) and is added with a 1 as binary.

First represent 123 as above:
 \\(123 = 01111011\\)
negate it's values:
\\(10000100\\)

Then add a `1` as binary
\\(1 = 00000001\\)

\\(10000100 + 00000001 = 10000101\\)


### Representing floating point numbers in binary {#representing-floating-point-numbers-in-binary}

Most floating-point numbers cannot be represented exactly in a
computer. Exact representation would only be possible if we had an
infinite number of bits. However, for the `float` datay type we are
limited to 32 bits. Because of this, there is usually a rounding error
during representation, and the floating-point number is approximated
rather than stored exactly.

These 32 bits are divided into three parts to represent a
floating-point number:

-   1 bit for the sign
-   8 bit for the exponent
    -   the exponent determines the position of the decimal point
-   23 bit for the mantissa
    -   the mantissa holds the significant digits of the number
    -   these bits correspond to negative exponents in base 2

a shortend example:

| Exponent        | sign bit | 2^8 | ... | 2^2 | 2^1 | 2^0 | point | 2^-1 | 2^-2 | 2^-3  | 2^-4   | ... | 2^-23       |
|-----------------|----------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-------|------|------|-------|--------|-----|-------------|
| Exponent Values |          | 256 | ... | 4   | 2   | 1   | point | 0.5  | 0.25 | 0.125 | 0.0625 | ... | 0.0000..... |

To represent a floating-point number in binary, follow the same
procedure as for integer numbers, but consider the exponent and
mantissa structure.


### Binary Counter {#binary-counter}

With increasing decimal numbers, the binary representation follows
these rules:

-   check the last binary digit: if it is `0`, change it to `1`
-   if the last binary digit is `1`, change it to `0` and check the next
    digit to the left
-   repeat this process untill you find a `0`, which you then change to `1`

The initial binary state is `0`, so the decimal number `0` is represented as
binary `0`. Since the smallest common datatype is 8 bits, it is actually
represented as `00000000`.

**Example**

| Decimal | Binary |
|---------|--------|
| 0       | 0      |
| 1       | 1      |
| 2       | 10     |
| 3       | 11     |
| 4       | 100    |
| 5       | 101    |
| 6       | 110    |
| 7       | 111    |
| 8       | 1000   |
| 9       | 1001   |
| 10      | 1010   |
| 11      | 1011   |
| 12      | 1100   |
| 13      | 1101   |
| 14      | 1110   |
| 15      | 1111   |
| 16      | 10000  |
| 17      | 10001  |
| 18      | 10010  |
| 19      | 10011  |
| 20      | 10100  |
| 21      | 10101  |
| 22      | 10110  |
| 23      | 10111  |
| 24      | 11000  |
| 25      | 11001  |
| 26      | 11010  |
| 27      | 11011  |
| 28      | 11100  |
| 29      | 11101  |
| 30      | 11110  |


## Footer {#footer}


### Links {#links}
